I"g<p>Volcanoes and caves have more in common than you might think. Yes, one of them kicks out lots of deadly hot gases and chunks of rock generating a lot of stress if you happen to be in the vicinity, while the other can provide excellent hangover relief when you’re wallowing and splashing your way through a cooling underground streamway (I definitely wouldn’t want to be hungover in the midst of a volcanic eruption). But both systems are controlled by underground plumbing and drainage that is hard to accurately visualise, because both involve anisotropic (directionally variable) ground conditions that are very challenging to study and mostly impossible to access (the cave passages explored by humans are a very small proportion of the flowpaths taken by underground water in karst systems).</p>

<p>They also both involve complex processes of sediment transport, the main difference being that in caves the water transporting the sediment is confined to the cave passage dimensions, which can lead to interesting passage shapes by a process known as paragenesis. By contrast, volcanic flows are rarely confined at all and can surmount considerable topographic highs, mostly because they are formed of mixtures of solid particles and hot gases moving at far higher speeds. Volcanism in the UK is long since over due to the lack of proximity to tectonic plate boundaries, the only places where the crust is locally thin enough for molten magma to rise to near the surface buoyantly. However, around 450 million years ago the UK’s western edge was a long chain of volcanic centres, one of the largest of these being the Scafell Pike Caldera Complex. This area is a true gift for anyone interested in terrestrial flow deposits: it is possible to see deposits of both fluvial (similar to caves but less confined) and volcanic flows side by side, along with the remnants of glacial flow. Around the Scafell Pike Caldera, flow is everywhere.</p>

<p>The walk up from New Dungeon Ghyll was as crowded as you would expect from a sunny August Bank Holiday weekend, a little colony of ants snaking their way up the side of the hill toward Stickle Tarn.</p>

<p>I was never especially gripped by igneous petrology (the study of the minerals found in rocks from cooled volcanic rocks) during my undergraduate degree. I think part of this might be to do with a lack of ability to focus my eyes when looking down microscopes. In any case, the deposits produced when volcanoes erupt explosively aren’t the kind that produce trippy kaleidoscope visuals when looked at in cross-polarised light. They are often mostly grey with a lot of poorly sorted angular shards. Menacing, but in a boring way, like a bailiff. However,  I have always been captivated by the sediments that are ejected from volcanoes when they erupt. These sedimentary deposits can take infinite diff form lethal flows, pyroclastic flows if they co</p>
:ET